In that extended example we saw
the value of doing good analytics
with these performance measures.
What first appeared to be significant
differences in skill turned out to be
purely chance.
And, that really emphasises
the importance of persistence.
You need to find ways of testing for
persistence.
So, in that case,
we just looked at split sample.
How performance varied in one year, and
then how it varied in the next year.
Finding ways to do that is
one of the most fundamental
ways you can parse signal from noise.
We're gonna focus on four additional
issues for the rest of the module.
Regression to the mean, sample size,
signal independence, and
process versus outcome.
These are all important concepts to
have in mind as you dig into your data.
And they are also
issues that we tend to have if we
only reason about data intuitively.
So there are issues that data can improve,
analytics can improve.
But analytics aren't apparent, you can
still make these mistakes, even with data.
So let's drop into them.
The first is regression to the mean,
and want to start that
with a very simple model of performance
where you can think of performance terms
of real tendency plus luck, and we've
been talking about this a little bit.
We can formalize it, and don't get
too put off by the baby math here but
in formal terms.
You can think of performance,
y as a function of x true ability and
e some error,
some randomly distributed error around 0.
Now what does that mean for
when we sample on extreme performance?
What underlies extreme success and
failure?
What is that, if that's the model of
the world and everything that we've been
saying so far says it is, that there's
some noise in these performance measures,
what does it mean when we
sample on extreme performance?
Well it means that extreme success
suggests that the person might
in fact have superior ability or tried
very hard but also that they got lucky.
The error was positive.
And conversely extreme failure
perhaps means inferior ability or
that they did not try very ord, but also
negative era or that they got unlucky.
We can be sure that as we sample very
extremely on performance measure.
A noisy performance measure,
and they're all noisy
we can be sure that when they go to
the extremes we get extreme error as well.
So what are the consequences of that?
There's one very important consequence and
that is in subsequence periods,
error won't be negative again.
It will regress to the mean.
You'd expect it to be zero.
Error is by definition zero.
And if you've got very
positive error in one period,
you would expect less error
in the following period.
This is a notion called
regression to the mean and
it's one of the most important
notions in performance evaluation.
So, an example,
there was a study a few years ago of
mutual fund performance in the 1990s.
So the study divided the 1990s
into two halves, 1990-1994 and
then 1995-1999 and they looked at the top
ten performing funds from the first
half of the decade and here I'll show
them to you, we anonimized them,
this is just supposed funds a through j,
and their performance in the early 1990s.
There were 283 funds in this study, these
are only the top 10 performing funds.
Then they did two things they go and
ask how do these
funds perform in subsequent years, and
they did an interesting thing in between,
they ask people what do they predict
happened in the new few years.
What do they think performance will be
realized in the second half of the decade.
So here are the predictions,
the estimations,
from the people that they asked.
They didn't think the top performing firm,
A would again be the top performing firm,
they though maybe 10th.
And so on down the list.
E, which is the 5th performing firm
they thought well, maybe 44th.
And so you can see that they didn't
expect the firms to be as good, but
they expected some regression to the mean.
Then they looked at
what actually happened.
What actually happened?
It ranged from 129th, 21st, 54th.
The interesting thing is that on average,
the firms performed, their rank was 142.5.
What is the significance of 142.5?
It's half of the total number
of firms in the study.
In other words, the average performance of
the top ten firms in the second period,
the second half of the 90s,
was perfectly average for this sample.
They regressed entirely.
The top ten mutual funds
in the top half of the 90s,
the early 90s, regressed entirely to
the mean in the second half of the 90s.
If that's the case,
what does that say about how much skill
versus luck was involved in how those
firms did, in the first half of the 90s?
If they regress all the way to
the mean in the second period,
it suggests that there was no skill.
That the differences that we saw,
and there are huge consequences to those
differences because we know that new fund
flow to successful funds,
were in fact entirely based on luck.
So, there are many other examples.
Danny Conium the Nobel
prize winner Danny Conium,
it gives a famous example of being
an officer in the Israeli Air Force.
He was studying the officer
in the Israeli Air Force.
This was early in Common's career.
And the officer told him,
"Punishment is more effective than praise.
Whenever I punish a pilot
after a really poor flight,
I see better performance the next time.
Whenever I praise a pilot
after an excellent flight,
I see worse performance the next time.
Therefore, it must be that punishment
is more effective than praise.
What's a more parsimonious explanation?
The more parts explanations that there's
a little chance involved with whether
a pilot has a good performance
a good flight, or a bad flight.
And after a good flight if there's some
chance involved there you would expect
that the following flight wouldn't
be as good and conversely.
After a bad flight, if there is some
chance involved, you would expect,
you would predict that the next flight,
would on average be better.
This is exactly why we have to be so
careful about regression to the mean.
We have the wrong model of the world if we
don't appreciate regression to the mean.
We walk around like the Israeli Airforce
Officer who believe that it was all about
praise and punishment, as opposed to
merely statistical regression to the mean.
There's another example.
We're not gonna pick on
Israeli Air Force officers.
One comes from Tom Peters,
from the original business book.
Peters and Waterman were
McKinsey consultants, no less.
And they did a study.
And it began as an internal study.
And they eventually published
it as a hugely best selling book
on what determines
excellence in companies.
They selected 43 high performing firms and
tried to learn what they could
about business practices
from these top 43 firms.
But subsequently if you folks evaluated
the performance of those 43 firms and
what do they find?
Five years later, there were still
some excellent companies and
there were some that were solid but
not exactly the top of their industries.
And then there were quite a few in
weakened positions and there were even
some from the supposed 43 excellent
companies who were fully troubled.
Now this is exactly what you'd expect from
regression to the mean and that suggests
that sample that Peters and Waterman had
grabbed as supposedly excellent firms.
They grabbed them perhaps they were
on average a little bit better, but
they had necessarily been lucky
to make it into that sample.
To be called the most successful of
43 firms in the world essentially.
They were necessarily lucky and
in subsequent periods,
they're not gonna have luck
break their direction.
So this is something that you'll see any
time you sample based on extreme values.
That if you sample on one attribute,
any other attribute that's not
perfectly related will tend to
be closer to the mean value.
So we've been talking about
performance at points in time.
If you sample on extreme
performance at one time period.
The subsequent time period
won't be as extreme,
whether you sample an extremely good or
extremely bad.
But it can also be attributes within
an individual or within an organization.
If you sample, say,
a person's running speed, and
then look at what their
language ability is.
These things are imperfectly related,
right?
So if you ever looked
at the fastest runners
how would you expect them to perform
on some language ability test?
They wouldn't be as high.
The fastest runners will,
almost by definition,
will not necessarily be the people
with the best language ability.
But that's not because there's some
inverse relationship between language and
running ability.
It's that these two traits are simply
imperfectly correlated, and so
when you sample on the extreme you
have to expect regression to the mean
on any other attribute.
So we could spend a day on
regression to the mean effect.
There aren't many concepts that are more
important in understanding the world,
than regression to the mean.
We could spend hours on this.
And I would be very happy if you walked
away from this course with only two or
three ideas, if this is one of them.
Because it's gonna help your
reasoning about the world.
Why is this so hard?
Why is this such a hard concept to stay?
To live?
Well there are a few things
that get in the way.
Among others, we have this outcome bias.
I mentioned it with Hershey and
Barron, referenced Hershey and Barron.
They're the ones that came up
with this study originally.
We tend to believe that good things
happen to people who worked hard.
Bad things happen to
people that worked badly.
And we draw too strong
an inference based on this.
We tend to judge decisions and
people by outcomes and not by process.
This is a real problem and
it gets in the way of our
understanding of this regression to
the mean framework for the world.
Two others.
One is hindsight bias.
Once we've seen something
occur we have a hard time
appreciating that we didn't
anticipate it occurring.
We, in fact,
often misbelieve that we anticipated
that that's exactly what would happen.
We show hindsight bias and again,
if that's the way we reason about
what happens, then we're not gonna
appreciate that what happens next could
possibly be just regression to the mean.
And finally narrative seeking.
We want to make sense of the world,
we want to connect the dots,
we came to believe things better
we can tell a causal story between
what took place at time one and
what took place at time two.
And if we can tell a causal story, then
we actually have a great confidence in
our ability to predict what happens next.
We seek these stories as opposed to what
I've been telling you which is this dry,
statistical reason for why things happen.
We seek stories.
And that again gets in the way
of our understanding of
the statistical processes that
actually drive what's going on.
So in short we make sense of the past.
We are sense making animals and
we make sense of the past.
And there's not a lot sense to be had for
merely regression to the mean, but
it's going to get in our way of
predicting what happens next.
We try to find stories
that connect all the dots.
And we, by doing that, give chance
too small a role in those stories.
So there was an internet mean that
captures this well a year or two ago
where, if this is knowledge distributed
in your experience in the past.
This is knowledge you might have.
And with that knowledge, perhaps you can
add some experience and start connecting
the dots, drawing some lines,
create something from that knowledge.
That's good.
That's what we want experience to do.
But then, sometimes we're inclined to do
this which is get a little too creative
and over fit those lines, and we turn what
should be a pretty straight grid, pretty
parsimonious connections into something
that is unlikely to replicate in the future.
It might be a very satisfying
interpretation of the past but
it's over fit, and
an over fit interpretation of the past is
going to make very bad
predictions about the future.